Lumigator Docs (#341)
mozilla-ai/lumigator: docs/source/conceptual-guides/endpoints.md

# Understanding Lumigator Endpoints

> This document shows how current endpoints in lumigator work. If you want to customize lumigator with

Reviewer: we should link to this from CONTRIBUTING

Author: Sure. This is just for understanding how endpoints work. I will add a new document describing how you can create a new one. Maybe we can link to the whole "Conceptual Guides" section, because later we're also have guides on how to add a new job, etc.

which is used to provide a short description of the route.

Let us now walk through a few examples to understand how Lumigator's endpoints work.

### The simplest endpoint: `/health`

The [`/health`](https://github.com/mozilla-ai/lumigator/blob/b1ea63ba3e1aae5907e46ffbe9bfd809253c6053/lumigator/python/mzai/backend/backend/api/routes/health.py)
route provides perhaps the simplest example as it allows you to get the current backend status which
is a constant:

```python
@router.get("/")
def get_health() -> HealthResponse:
    return HealthResponse(deployment_type=settings.DEPLOYMENT_TYPE, status="OK")
```

Note that the returned type is a `HealthResponse`: this is a
[pydantic model](https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/api/base_model/) defining the schema of the
returned data. The general rule is that all return values in our routes should match a predefined
schema. Schemas are defined under the `schemas` directory (in particular, `HealthResponse` can be
found [here](https://github.com/mozilla-ai/lumigator/blob/b1ea63ba3e1aae5907e46ffbe9bfd809253c6053/lumigator/python/mzai/schemas/schemas/extras.py#L16)),
typically in files with the same name of the route, service, etc.

> Being this simple, all the code for `get_health()` directly appears in the route file. A

Reviewer: ```suggestion
all the code for `get_health()` appears in the route file. A
```

Author: Changed!

`HealthResponse`, composed of a deployment type which is loaded from

> [`backend/settings.py`](https://github.com/mozilla-ai/lumigator/blob/b1ea63ba3e1aae5907e46ffbe9bfd809253c6053/lumigator/python/mzai/backend/backend/settings.py)

Reviewer: Suggestion: link to line number of load https://github.com/mozilla-ai/lumigator/blob/b1ea63ba3e1aae5907e46ffbe9bfd809253c6053/lumigator/python/mzai/backend/backend/settings.py#L12

> and the status (currently always ok), is returned. Nothing is ran, nothing is saved on DB or on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the status (currently always `OK`), is returned.
```

storage.

### One step further: `/datasets`

The `/datasets` route is a bit more complex as it has to interface both with the DB and the storage.
The simplest method there, `get_dataset`, already has basically all the components you'd find in
most of the advanced methods:

```python
@router.get("/{dataset_id}")
def get_dataset(service: DatasetServiceDep, dataset_id: UUID) -> DatasetResponse:
    return service.get_dataset(dataset_id)
```

* The core functionalities are provided by a *service* (in this case a `DatasetService`) defined in
  [`backend/services/datasets.py`](https://github.com/mozilla-ai/lumigator/blob/b1ea63ba3e1aae5907e46ffbe9bfd809253c6053/lumigator/python/mzai/backend/backend/services/datasets.py).

* Instead of directly passing a `DatasetService` to the `get_dataset` method, DatasetServiceDep is
  defined to perform a *dependency injection* (see
  [FastAPI's dependencies](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/tutorial/dependencies/)).

* As with the `/health` endpoint, a *schema* defines the return type (in this case a
  `DatasetResponse`).

> * Even if you don't see it yet, one more abstraction (*repository*) is used to access data on the DB

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `repository` abstraction is used to access data in the database.
```

> So, let us suppose you have already uploaded a dataset on Lumigator. What happens when you hit the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, let us suppose you have already uploaded a dataset to Lumigator. What happens when you hit the
```

`/datasets` endpoint by passing a dataset id?

First thing, `DatasetServiceDep` will make sure that all the dependencies to run your
`DatasetService` are met. If you look at
[`backend/api/deps.py`](https://github.com/mozilla-ai/lumigator/blob/b1ea63ba3e1aae5907e46ffbe9bfd809253c6053/lumigator/python/mzai/backend/backend/api/deps.py)
you will see that a `DatasetServiceDep` is nothing more than a `DatasetService` that depends on a
`DBSessionDep` and and `S3ClientDep`:

```python
def get_dataset_service(
    session: DBSessionDep, s3_client: S3ClientDep, s3_filesystem: S3FileSystemDep
) -> DatasetService:
    dataset_repo = DatasetRepository(session)
    dataset_repo = DatasetRepository(session)
    return DatasetService(dataset_repo, s3_client, s3_filesystem)

DatasetServiceDep = Annotated[DatasetService, Depends(get_dataset_service)]
```

> `DBSessionDep` and and `S3ClientDep` provide and additional level of dependencies, namely on a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`DBSessionDep` and and `S3ClientDep` provide an additional level of dependencies, namely on a
``

database session and on an S3 client.

> I'll leave you to transitively following dependencies. For now, it is interesting to note that while

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While
```

the S3 dependency is a "simple" one (i.e., it just instantiates a boto3 client in place), the
database one is a bit more advanced (i.e., it relies on a
[`DatabaseSessionManager`](https://github.com/mozilla-ai/lumigator/blob/b1ea63ba3e1aae5907e46ffbe9bfd809253c6053/lumigator/python/mzai/backend/backend/db.py)
to return a session).

> Secondly, `DatasetService` provides a `get_dataset` method which gets the actual data from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Second, `DatasetService` provides a `get_dataset` method which gets the actual data from the
```

database and returns a `DatasetResponse` after validating it:

```python
def get_dataset(self, dataset_id: UUID) -> DatasetResponse:
    record = self._get_dataset_record(dataset_id)
    return DatasetResponse.model_validate(record)

def _get_dataset_record(self, dataset_id: UUID) -> DatasetRecord:
    record = self.dataset_repo.get(dataset_id)

    if record is None:
        self._raise_not_found(dataset_id)
    return record
```

> The way data is selected from the database is through a *repository* , in this case from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We access the database using the `repository` abstraction
```

`DatasetRepository` class. All repositories are defined in `backend/repositories` and inherit from
[`BaseRepository`](https://github.com/mozilla-ai/lumigator/blob/b1ea63ba3e1aae5907e46ffbe9bfd809253c6053/lumigator/python/mzai/backend/backend/repositories/base.py)

> which is a general class providing the low-level code to count, create, update, get, delete, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which is a general class providing ORM access to SQL statements
```
